---
title: 'Structure of Effective Theories'
date: 2023-10-24
image: '/images/EFT.jpeg'
description: Proposed SSHRC Insight Research program

---

A central aim of philosophy of science is to characterize the nature, scope, and limits of scientific knowledge. To pursue that aim philosophers must clarify how theories represent the world and guide scientific practice. This project will develop and defend a novel account of scientific knowledge inspired by the "effective field theory" (EFT) view in physics. This account of the structure of theories contrasts sharply with conventional philosophical views, and provides the resources needed to reframe philosophical debates fruitfully.

There are two main objectives for the project. First, I aim to develop this EFT inspired account of theories as a general template for understanding the structure of theories, and their role in inquiry, both within physics and in science more generally. This work will be relevant to philosophers of science, as well as epistemologists and metaphysicians. Philosophical accounts of the structure of theories developed in the mid-20th century, largely inspired by physics, have cast a long shadow in philosophy of science. These accounts do not even capture essential aspects of how theories function in physics, as this project aims to show, so there is little reason to rely upon them in assessing other areas of science. This faulty view of the structure of theories has generated challenges, such as the difficulty of reconciling two conflicting lines of thought regarding the nature of scientific knowledge. On the one hand, new discoveries may overturn what we thought we knew; on the other hand, science has apparently achieved durable results. The project will culminate with a monograph that shows how the EFT view responds to this challenge.

Second, the EFT view will be developed and tested by examining case studies in the foundations of physics. These will focus on the technical sense of EFTs, developed in quantum field theory, and will critically highlight the limitations of the EFT view, with an aim to clarify the qualitative features of the framework that can be used to develop a new account of theories. Determining which features fail to generalize will help to decide which features can form the core of the general view. These case studies will also contribute to foundational debates in physics regarding the viability of EFT as a framework for quantum gravity and cosmology.

The project will pursue both objectives in tandem, starting with a series of collaborative papers on the distinctive features of EFTs, their limitations within the context of gravitational physics, and their relation to successive approximations and measurement theory. To begin, there are several features of EFTs that make for appealing contrast with traditional views in the philosophy of science. First, the EFT view treats theories as inherently related to other theories in a large, structured theory space of alternatives that bear specific formal relationships to one another. Second, EFTs contain explicit reference to a limited domain of phenomena to which they apply. Finally, the structure of the theory space provides resources for quantifying and limiting the impact of physics from outside the proper domain of an EFT. The EFT view both acknowledges our ignorance and delimits its impact on the current state of knowledge. These features form the basis for a general account of theory structure based on applied mathematics and notions of approximation, rather than formal logic. Once further features of such a view are fully developed, I will write a monograph presenting the new account of scientific theories, aimed at philosophers of science.

The project is being pursued in collaboration with [Adam Koberinski](https://adamkoberinski.ca/), [Jim Weatherall](https://jamesowenweatherall.com/), and [Francesca Vidotto](https://www.rotman.uwo.ca/portfolio-items/vidotto/).