---
title: 'Loneliness'
date: 2019-10-10
image: '/images/loneliness.jpg'
---

UNDER CONSTRUCTION.

Loneliness among older adults is chronic and has been linked to detrimental health outcomes. It is also increasingly wide-spread, due to urbanization and digitization trends. However, interventions that address loneliness are difficult to formulate, as loneliness is a complex, multivalent phenomena irreducible to simple social isolation.  There is thus a need to construct a multidimentional measure for loneliness that can ground innovative cross-disciplinary interventions. 

With Joshua Gross (Biology), Rebecca Lee (Nursing), and Maobing Tu (Environmental Engineering), I'm co-PI of a study that aims to characterizes loneliness in older adults along several dimensions -- psychological, social, biological, and environmental (PSBE) -- with the aim of determining measureable PSBE markers, correlating their interactions, and thus formulating a multivariate metric.

We hypothesize that the various markers of loneliness exhibit repeatable and systematic correlations _which are not reducible to the effects of a single set of markers._ If the hypothesis proves correct, it will provide a comprehensive, 360-degree view of loneliness, and open the door to complex interventions. If it proves incorrect, inconsequential interventions can be eliminated and research focused on the set of markers that prove significant. Either a positive or a null result is highly significant.

AIM 1: to characterize loneliness through psychological and sociological measures obtained through interview techniques, and to validate existing sociological measures. We hypothesize that loneliness in 21st-century American society is different from previous forms of loneliness, and that existing psychological measures must be modified to capture it. (i) Through hermeneutic-phenomenological interviewing, we allow self-identified lonely seniors to characterize the experience of loneliness from a first-person perspective. The reported, lived experience serves as the fundamental phenomena in relation to which other markers will be evaluated. This bottom-up approach is necessary in order to preclude predefining loneliness and then circularly confirming the definition. (ii) We validate a prevalent existing measure of loneliness (the UCLA survey) through cognitive interviewing. Cognitive interviews are necessary to determines whether subjects understand the measure as it was intended; i.e, as measuring _loneliness_ as they describe it in (i). Testing the measure against the lived experience is necessary as the UCLA measure was formulated in the 1970s, before non-physical, online social interactions became common.

AIM 2: to identify non-psychological biomarkers associated with loneliness within the human gut biome and gut metabolites (GBGM). GBGM  composition has been shown to have significant impact on mental health, particularly depression. We hypothesize GBGM is also linked to loneliness, but that it can be distinguished from the GBGM characterization of depression. As loneliness is often conflated with depression, an independent, non self-reported measure of loneliness is necessary in order to disaggregate treatments. Through whole genome sequencing of fecal samples from lonely and non-lonely adults, the presence of microbes, bacteria, and viruses correlated with loneliness will be determined. Correlation will tested against the complex picture of loneliness of AIM 1, not a single-scale loneliness measure such as the UCLA survey. Once again, a null result is highly significant, as it suggests that pharmacological treatments of depression and loneliness can be unified.

AIM 3: to identify environmental markers of loneliness. By geotracking lonely and non-lonely participants from AIM 2, we correlate measures obtained in AIM 1 & 2 with physical activity, motion within and outside enclosed environments, and time spent in interactive spaces (like public parks, meeting rooms, etc.). While older adults are vulnerable to isolation due to decreased mobility and highly regimented/restricted living environments, not all factors in their environment are equally consequential to the loneliness diagnosis. By mapping and analyzing movements of lonely and non-lonely people we identify real-world environmental barriers to activity/interactions and construct metrics by which to measure their impacts on loneliness.

The overarching goal of this proposal is to develop an integrated, multidimensional model of loneliness that will account for the heterogeneous factors that promote loneliness in older adults and will guide public policy discussions of the epidemic of loneliness in a technologically-rich, but personally challenging world.

